An Overview of Electrostatic Speakers

Wes Hatch

1. History of the Electrostatic Loudspeaker
Given the recent stimulation of interest in the electrostatic loudspeaker (ESL), one
would suspect that this type of speaker is a relatively new development. However, this is
not the case; the appearance of electrostatic speakers even predates that of the more
commonly found dynamic coil speakers, dating back to the early 1920’s. It is known that
condenser microphones have enjoyed a great deal of success since their introduction; why
then, have these speakers—which operate on the same principle—taken so long to take
root in mainstream audio application?
On closer inspection, we learn that these unique speakers were, upon their initial
release, plagued by unwanted discharges, electrical breakdown, low efficiency, rapid
oxidation of unstable structural materials, and difficulty in obtaining thin, manageable
membranes—in general, there were serious issues and concerns regarding their
reliability. With the introduction of the much more rugged and reliable dynamic coil
loudspeaker in the 1930’s, electrostatic speakers quickly became forgotten, taking a back
seat to cheaper and more efficient alternatives. The problems associated with ESL’s
arose partially from an early, crude design, but moreover from a lack of quality
construction materials and techniques. This remained the case until the 1950’s, when
discoveries of new materials, particularly that of polymer plastics, made possible the
construction of more efficient and reliable models. In addition, new concepts of design
evolved, seeking to take advantage of the full range of potential that electrostatics had to
offer.
During this time, there was an increasing demand for the high-quality
reproduction of high frequencies. Audiophiles seemed to be demanding a new, higher
standard in the quality of reproduced audio signals. Electrostatic speakers, by way of
design, are readily able to offer a faithful reproduction of high frequency content, and
behave very predictably when doing so. This is very desirable, of course, as overtones
and higher harmonics can contribute significantly to the overall timbre of the sound; this
more precise imitation of the original recorded signal helps to make the audio emerge
more realistically. These factors, in short, contributed to a revival of interest in the
electrostatic loudspeaker. Unfortunately, this revitalization has never been fully realized
as, while ESL’s do excel at producing higher frequencies, the bass is difficult to
reproduce and thus a more conventional moving-coil unit was always needed anyways;
also, the cost of producing these devices has always put them out of reach of most
consumers.
2. How they work
The basic design of an electrostatic loudspeaker consists of a very thin plastic
membrane (1/10th the thickness of a human hair) suspended between two electrodes. The
membrane is electrostatically charged with a high DC polarizing voltage, while the
electrodes are fed with ground potential. Typical polarizing voltages are usually in the
order of 2000 – 3000V. When there is no signal, the diaphragm remains suspended at
equal distances between the two electrodes. If a voltage is impressed upon the primary
coil of the transformer, a positive voltage appears at one electrode, while an equal, yet
opposite in polarity, voltage appears at the other. Since like charges repel and opposite

2

charges attract, the diaphragm will be attracted to
one side, while pushed away from the other. This
arrangement is called a ‘push-pull’ configuration.
If an audio signal is sent to the transformer
instead of ground potential, an electromagnetic
field will be created which varies in response to
the changing voltage of the audio signal. The
diaphragm can then be made to move back and
forth in this field, consequently mimicking the
changes in the input signal. Finally, both
electrodes are perforated, so that they seem
‘acoustically transparent,’ thus avoiding pressure
effects of trapped air and also allowing acoustic
energy to move away from the diaphragm.
Two methods of constructing electrostatic
speakers have emerged. The first involves
stretching the diaphragm over a frame, supporting
it at its edges, and leaving the middle unattached
and free to vibrate. The second method, which is
much less common today then it was in the
1950’s and 60’s, uses an “inert diaphragm”
supported by several tiny elements equally spaced across its surface. These spacers hold
the diaphragm in the centre between the electrodes, yet more importantly allow the
diaphragm to be curved without seriously impeding its ability to vibrate. This capability
of curving the diaphragm is an important tool in controlling the directionality of radiated
sound, as discussed later.
2.1 Details of operation1
The first item to understand is the forces at work in an electromagnetic field. A
charge, Q, placed in a field of strength Vsig/2d will experience the following force:
F = Q x (Vsig/2d)

(a)

where F is the force (N) experienced, Vsig is the signal voltage, Q is the strength of the
charge (C), and 2d is the distance between each electrode (d is then the distance between
the diaphragm and one electrode—this simplifies things later).
This is adequate for small charges, but the polarizing voltage on the diaphragm is
huge by comparison, so more detailed analysis is necessary. Let’s assume the total
charge on the diaphragm will not change once it has reached equilibrium—the large
resistance placed in series with the polarizing voltage helps prevent any discharge.
Furthermore, by examining the simple schematic above, it should be obvious that there is
an inherent capacitance present between each plate and the diaphragm. The total
capacitance2 will vary as the diaphragm moves, increasing as it strays farther from
equilibrium. Therefore its voltage must fall, as given in the fundamental equation:
1
2

This section assumes an ESL with flat plates, of the ‘push-pull’ design.
Ctotal = (C1 x C2)/ (C1 + C2) is not included above as it seems straightforward…

3

Q = CVpol = constant

(b)

where Q is the total charge (C) between the electrodes and the diaphragm, C is the total
capacitance (F) of the system, and V is the polarizing voltage (V). Since Q will
essentially remain constant, it follows then, that C and V will vary in an inverse
relationship to each other. The capacitance of a parallel plate air-dielectric capacitor is
given by the formula:
C = _0A/d

(c)

where A is the area (m2) of the plates, d is the distance (m) between them, and _0 is a
constant equaling 8.854 x 10-12 F/m. If we take the above result and, using equations (a)
and (b), we can find the force which is created by the signal voltage; this result is
independent of the diaphragms’ position from equilibrium:
Fsig = _0AVpolVsig / d2
Where Fsig is given in Newtons. So now we have an equation which relates how much
force acts on the diaphragm given a certain input voltage. Typical forces for a 1.3m x
0.7m diaphragm with a 2mm gap, a polarizing voltage of 3kV, and a signal voltage of
2kV peak (very roughly approximating any ESL…) are in the range of 12 N.
The above analysis neglects any loss of charge which the diaphragm may incur, it
also neglects the fact that the force will vary according to the diaphragms’ position
between the plates. However, this can give us a general idea of what is going on in an
ESL, and what forces are at work.
3. Performance related issues
3.1 Radiation
Single cones and domes can be said to behave effectively as point sources, in that
the sound level they produce will drop by 6 dB for each doubling of distance away from
the driver. However, the attenuation with distance from a planar source exhibits quite a
different response. There is no decrease in the level until a distance of width/ ! has been
reached (see diagram, next page), at which point a –3dB per doubling of distance is
noticed. It is not until a distance of height/ ! is reached that we find the common –6dB
decrease. The diaphragm of an electrostatic speaker is essentially an unbaffled piston,
and behaves much like
as described above. In
the data shown,
transitions occur
abruptly; however, in
the real world there
would be a more
gradual transition
between sections.

4

Room conditions will affect the strength of the measured sound, too.
Reverberations and can cause little attenuation in the listening space, which may
complicate stereophonic reproduction. Controlling the directivity of the sound (discussed
later), however, has had positive results in the quality and realism of stereo imaging.
3.2 Frequency Response
In general, the frequency response of a simple ESL can be observed below. Bass
frequencies fall off at a rate of 6dB/octave, while there is a flat response for higher
frequencies. Traditionally, ESL’s
have been paired with moving coil
sub-woofers to compensate for the
loss of bass, but recently new, fullspectrum designs have made this
unnecessary.
The uppermost frequency limit
is restricted primarily by the high
current demands which the speaker
places on the amplifier. Since the
loudspeaker load is primarily one of
capacitive reactance, there can be
great amounts of current drawn at high
frequencies. (Recall that: V = IR; V is
kept constant, and Rcap will decrease at
high frequencies, therefore I must
increase).
One unfortunate deficiency which electrostatic loudspeakers possess is a natural
inability to reproduce low frequencies. The limiting factor in producing low-end is the
‘excursion capability’ of the diaphragm. First, we must consider that the wavelength
increases as the frequency decreases. So, in order to recreate bass frequencies, the
diaphragm must be able to move a greater amount of air than it has to for higher
frequencies. This can be accomplished in two ways: either we make the size of the
diaphragm greater, or we allow it to have a greater degree of freedom in its amplitude as
it vibrates. Both options have drawbacks, however. By making the membrane larger, we
incur very irregular high-frequency directional control, but more importantly, there are
feasibility limits as to how large we can go. Allowing the diaphragm more leeway to
move is also not a viable solution because the gap between the diaphragm and electrodes
must remain small. Otherwise, there will be insufficient attractive and repelling forces to
move the diaphragm accurately, thus causing a loss of clarity in the higher frequencies.
Therefore, it is customary to construct ESL’s using several diaphragms, or panels,
of different sizes. Narrow, vertical panels used for the highest frequencies are placed
next to larger ones for the middle and lower frequencies. By varying the size and tension
of the diaphragm, these panels can then be optimized for a certain frequency range. The
result is a smooth response, as each panel still operates as a full-range driver, but being
optimized for a specific frequency range. Moreover, each radiating panel is proportional
in size to the frequencies it will be radiating, thus having an effect over the dispersion of
said frequencies (as discussed below). Finally, since each diaphragm acts as a full range

5

driver (but optimized for a certain range), there is no need for a crossover3 (although
some systems still use them) and problems with phase distortion do not arise. There are
no discontinuities in the frequency response curve, and we get the full music spectrum, as
it was recorded. A variation on the above design is to use a crossover to filter out midand –high frequency content on the largest panels, and high frequency content on
medium size panels. In this way, the entire radiating surface is used for the bass, with
less area devoted to the midrange, and even less for higher frequencies. The result is that
the levels of the different frequency ranges will be more carefully balanced, and the
presence of the bass can be more readily heard4. Other strategies include setting the
resonant frequency5 of each panel at a slightly different bass frequency, thus achieving
peaks in the bass with the equivalent input voltage.
Another advantage of a system of panels is that there is a reduced capacity per
section. This reduces the destructiveness of a spark should a spark occur between the
electrodes. With a large capacity charged to a high potential, a spark may readily be hot
enough to burn a hole in through the diaphragm, while with smaller panels a much less
intense spark occurs for the same voltage. Also, the overall sound will not be affected as
other panels will continue to radiate while the one afflicted recharges.
3.1.1 Directivity
Electrostatic loudspeakers offer new possibilities in controlling the directivity of
sound; indeed, much of the appeal of these speakers stems from their unique radiation
properties. As we learned earlier, there are two methods of going about constructing
ESL’s: with a curved diaphragm, or simply with a flat diaphragm.
The curved diaphragm methodology was the first and earliest approach to
controlling radiation patterns. As we should recall, a flat radiating surface which is large
compared to the wavelength of the radiated sound becomes increasingly directional. That
is, until we curve the plane in the horizontal direction. A curved radiator of this type is
observed to give an even dispersion of high frequencies—all the way to the end of the
reproduced spectrum—over an angle of 55°. In the vertical direction, the radiator
remains flat, and so radiation occurs at 90° from the diaphragm up until the height of the
speaker. Thus, by controlling the radius of curvature in the horizontal plane and the
vertical height of the diaphragm, speaker manufacturers can control the dispersion pattern
to fit any area. This method is not so popular today and ESL’s are now rarely produced
this way. The principle drawback is that this system is not of the ‘push-pull’ type which
otherwise predominate today; rather, only one electrode is used to ‘push’ while the
mechanical restoring force of the diaphragm returns it to its original position. In short,
high frequency content suffers and the maximum level is considerably less than with two
electrodes because there is less force acting on the diaphragm.
With the more common flat-panel systems, advantage is taken of the size of the
radiating surface. A radiator which is large compared to the wavelength of the radiated
3

The “Quad 989,” for example, has no crossover
Full-range speakers such as the “Emperor” are able to generate over 120dB of acoustic pressure from
30Hz—45kHz, and 100dB at ultra-low frequencies of 15-20Hz; they use a crossover, however.
5
T = M(f x a x b)2 / 0.146, where T = tension, M = mass of diaphragm, a and b = dimensions of the
diaphragm, and f = fundamental frequency.
4

6

sound becomes increasingly directional (such as the membrane in an ESL). Therefore it
is common to construct ESL’s as described above, with several panels of different sizes.
Varying the size of each panel enables one to accurately control the directivity of the
sound. Larger panels will beam high frequency content, while smaller panels will evenly
distribute it. So, with a clever design using various shapes of panel, it is possible to get
frequencies to disperse evenly.6
3.4 Efficiency, Impedance (acoustic, electric)
In theory, the efficiency of an ESL is very high because there are very few things
which can weaken the signal power. Of the few things which can, however, is the airload resistance (which represents the useful audio output, anyway). This acoustic
impedance can vary over the surface, becoming more mechanical in nature as one
approaches the clamped edges. While the mass of the diaphragm, given its extremely
thin cross-section, can be neglected, it is a common misconception with ESL’s, that their
moving mass is extremely small. There is a layer of air directly associated with the
diaphragm which is estimated to be about five times greater than the actual per-unit mass
of the diaphragm itself.
The electrical impedance which ESL’s present to an amplifier varies with
frequency since these speakers are nothing but large capacitors. As the frequency
increases, the impedance decreases by 6dB per octave. (I increase, Z or R decreases…,
P? => P = VI = I2R) …however, demands more current at high f, so P = VI means
power usage increases at high f.
Power requirements also increase with the size of the diaphragm. A 35W valve
amp, or a 50W tube amp are sufficient for a few speakers, with most others requiring
around 100W.
3.5 Power Output
The maximum output of an electrostatic loudspeaker is proportional to the
maximum strength of the electrostatic field generated between the diaphragm and the
electrodes. This value is the sum of the polarizing voltage and that of the peak signal
voltage which is applied to the electrodes. As this total value becomes too large,
however, the dielectric breakdown of air occurs between the diaphragm and the
electrodes. To avoid this, manufacturers will set the polarizing voltage plus the
maximum intended signal voltage to be slightly less than the breakdown of the air itself.
In terms of the maximum force which can be generated, the following equation is given:
F = (u2/16!)(1.11 x 10-5) dyn/cm2
where F is the force per unit area, and u is the maximum electrical field strength (V/cm)
before the onset of air ionization. In terms of acoustical pressure:
P = Isig x Vpol/2!crd

6

Some manufacturers, such as “InnerSound,” prefer to have very narrow dispersion; others, such as
“Quad” and “Martin-Logan” have very wide dispersion.

7

where Isig is signal current sent to the plates (A), Vpol is the polarizing voltage, c is
velocity of sound, r is the measuring distance (m), and d is the space between the
diaphragm and the electrode. P is in N/m2.
The maximum output of most ESL’s is still not as great as the average dynamiccoil design. Luckily, advances in design have greatly increased the maximum possible
volume level over levels of 40 years ago—maximum levels of 120dB are rare but not
unheard of.
4. Advantages over conventional speakers
Now we come to some of the electrostatic speakers’ many advantages. (This will
probably read like an advertisement because I’ve been swept up in the propaganda I’ve
been exposed to while researching these things…) The first and most apparent benefit is
its reproduction of high frequency content. The response of the lightweight diaphragm is
in every way superior to the heavy moving coil. Recall that the moving part of a
magnetic speaker is relatively substantial—its voice coil, suspension system, and cone
add up to a lot of mass. The total weight of all of these parts is much more than the air
that the speaker drives, and since music consists mostly of transients, the mass of
magnetic speakers prevents them from responding quickly enough to follow a rapidly
changing waveform with perfect precision. We know that the mass of an electrostatic
loudspeakers’ diaphragm is quite small and can, as a result, respond near-instantaneously
to the audio signal. This is not to say that transient response is ‘perfect,’ but when
compared to the moving coil, the difference is readily discernible.
Another attraction of ESL’s is that the diaphragm can be a full frequency driver.
This means that no crossover is necessary, or that the crossover frequency is quite low if
other methods are employed to strengthen the bass. Either way, coloration from phase
distortion in the higher frequencies is removed.
The diaphragm in an ESL, for the most part, moves evenly over its entire surface
(movement varies as we progress from clamped at the edges to more free in the middle),
whereas the voice coil of a magnetic speaker drives only one point—the apex of the cone.
Cones are designed to not be perfectly rigid—different parts vibrating at different
frequencies—so the driven surface flexes and distorts, consequently distorting the sound.
The advantage which ESL’s have here is that ‘breakup’ is eliminated, removing another
coloration of the sound which is familiar to ordinary moving-coil systems. Also, because
the diaphragm moves more equally as a unit, it has virtually zero distortion7, so their
sound quality remains high, and they produce a unified, coherent wave-front for precise
holographic-quality imaging.
Of the many potential pitfalls in the accurate reproduction of an audio signal,
resonance is something which poses few problems for the ESL. Changing the tension of
the diaphragm enables manufacturers to control which frequencies the ESL will resonate
at. Usually this value is set below 100Hz, meaning there are no high frequency
resonances. A magnetic speaker resonates at many frequencies, behaving somewhat like
a bell. Also, because the "ringing” continues long after the original note has stopped,

7

Nonlinear distortions are below 0.1 - 0.05%, comparable with the distortions of a good amplifier.

8

transient response is poor. And finally, ESL’s don’t need a cabinet. All those problems
associated with cabinet design can be circumvented.
All this, in short, frees the electrostatic loudspeaker from limitations which plague
conventional systems. Coloration and non-linear distortion which are associated with
most speaker systems is removed. Indeed, we are so used to hearing the ‘colour’ which
the moving-coil loudspeaker introduces that we have grown to accept it. Certainly,
hearing the ‘uncolored’ version will come as a revelation. And while there still exist
problems with ESL’s, (sure, they’re still expensive and big) they have overcome many
other limiting factors which have existed since their resurgence of popularity in the late
1950’s. With further developments in materials, cheaper polymers, and ongoing
research, these types of speaker are sure to start showing up with more frequency.8

8

Pun intended.

9

Bibliography
Peter J. Baxandall, “Electrostatic Loudspeakers, “ in Loudspeaker and Headphone
Handbook, edited by John Borwick, Oxford: Reed Educational and Professional
Publishing Ltd, pg. 106 – 195 (1998).
John Eargle, Loudspeaker handbook, New York: Chapman & Hall, pg. 114 – 120 (1997).
Arthur A. Janszen, “An Electrostatic Loudspeaker Development,” in An Anthology of
Articles on Loudspeakers from the pages of the Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society vol.1 – vol.25, pg. 21 – 24 (1955).
Theodore Lindenberg, “The Isophase Loudspeaker,” in An Anthology of Articles on
Loudspeakers from the pages of the Journal of the Audio Engineering Society
vol.1 – vol.25, pg. 25 – 28 (1956).
H. M. Tremaine, Audio Cyclopedia, Indianapolis: Howard W. Sams & Co., pg 1084 –
1090 (1969).
InnerSound,
“Electrostatic
mid-range
http://www.innersound.net/electrostatic.htm

10

tweeter

element”

